[MUSIC]
>> Kyle: The last pattern
that I want to teach you is.
And by the way, after I teach of this
last pattern there's a last exercise.
So I'm gonna teach you
CSP in exercise nine.
Exercise ten is a much more sophisticated
application that I've built,
it's called a tale of three list.
And your exercise there is going to be to
go back and revisit either reactive or
CSP in the context of a much
more sophisticated application.
So if you're looking for more practice on
that stuff, it's coming with exercise ten.
So don't feel like that's the last
that we're gonna talk about it.
But I want to shift gears and
focus on our last major pattern
to introduce is called CSP.
CSP is about modeling
concurrency with channels.
We've modeled concurrency now three,
or four, or five different ways.
This is another way of
modeling concurrency.
And channels, if you wanna
think about what is a channel,
a channel is kinda like a stream,
it's kinda like a pipe.
Except there's one important
characteristic and
that is that the pipe
has no buffer size and
therefore has automatically built
into it this notion of back pressure.
So if you've done stream space programming
before you've probably heard or
read about this notion of back pressure.
But to illustrate that I want
you to imagine that I have two
different ends of a hose.
One way over here and
then one way over here, and
there's two people on either end.
And they don't see each other, they don't
have any communication between each other.
And then this guy on this
side says I'm gonna start
pouring some water down through the hose.
And the guy on the other end has the water
coming out and he's spraying it.
At some point the guy who's spraying the
water says I don't want any more water.
But he doesn't have
a communication with this guy,
so how is he going to tell this
guy I don't want any more water?
Well he's gonna cap off the hose so
that on the other end
no more water can go in because
the hose is completely filled up.
That's back pressure.
That's a reverse way of communicating up
from consumer to producer to say stop
producing cuz I don't want any more.
Is everybody following me?
This is like 50,000 foot view of stuff.
Well there are places in
our applications where we
don't have a direct connection
between producer and consumer.
Because we've intentionally
kept them separate.
But we do want to have a signal,
some way of signaling to the producer.
I don't wanna take any more data on
this end, stop sending me stuff.
In the RxJS world that's their distinction
between hot and cold observables,
by the way.
But converting between hot and
cold observables is not quite as clean and
easy, at least in my practice,
as it might seem in theory.
So another way of modeling that signal
is to use a channel in a CSP system.
Because the channel, as I said,
is like a pipe that can only
take one message at a time.
And it automatically has back pressure,
and what that means is you can't send me
something until I'm ready to take it.
And I can't take something
until you're ready to send it.
Is everybody following me?
There's no queue there.
It's one message that
transfers through the channel.
So, it's this notion of blocking channels.
Now CSP, it stands for
communicating sequential processes.
This actually was a pattern
invented way back in the 60s.
Guy named Hoare, he wrote this book called
Communicating Sequential Processes.
It was a model for managing concurrency.
Some of you may have heard of
the actor model of concurrency,
and there's a close but
not direct relationship between the two.
The major difference with actors, at least
from my research, the major difference
with actors versus this thing that
I'm about to talk to you about.
With actors when you send
a message it's asynchronous.
You send a message and
at some other point,
somebody on the other end picks it up.
With CSP when you send a message
it's very synchronous.
At least the semantics are,
When I wanna send a message there has
to be somebody on the other end that's
ready to take it.
Cuz my hose can only accept
one message at a time, okay.
So that's the major difference
if you've heard about actors.
It's the major difference between
synchronous message passing with CSP
versus asynchronous message
passing with actors.
So communicating sequential processes,
what is what does this all about?
It's about modeling your
application with lots of tiny
independent pieces that we call processes.
And if JavaScript had full
>> Kyle: like threading to it,
if we could do like you can in Node where
you can set up child processes and stuff.
If we had full threading then every
independent piece would be on its
own thread and it would be running
entirely independently of everybody else.
Well that's great because a lot of
the times they are doing their own thing.
But there are cases where
these two independent pieces
need to coordinate with each other.
So you have two different parts of your
application that are normally just kind of
running doing their own thing.
But there is a state in which they get
to where they say I need to communicate
with this guy.
And this guy gets to a state where he says
I need some information from that guy.
So whatever they've been
doing independently,
they get to a point where they
say we need to coordinate.
And send a message in either direction,
or perhaps both, one message this way,
one message back.
And then as soon as the messages have
passed, they become unblocked and
they go back to being independent.
That's what we mean by processes,
is that these things could
in theory run independently.
Now we know within JavaScript,
things aren't actually running
independently like that.
But we have seen something today
that does sort of act like that.
Does anybody know what I'm talking about?
>> Kyle: Didn't
we see something today that sort of acts
like it can just block itself and not
affect any of the rest of the application?
>> Speaker 2: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Kyle: Generators, right?
So what if I had a bunch of different
generators that were all running in
different places, and they were
running independently with each other.
And then at some point
two generators said hey,
we need to coordinate with each other.
So let's have a communication channel
where we can both block each other,
both block waiting for
the other one to show up.
And as soon as both of us of showed
up we can send a message back and
then we can go back to being independent.
That's really the conceptual basis for
CSP.
And while that sounds fantastically
more complicated, it is.
It's also fantastically more powerful.
Because we can literally model every
independent piece of our application
totally separate of everything else.
And all we have to think about is when I
need a message I wait for the message.
Or when I need to send a message I
wait for the sending of the message.
And other than that we
have no understanding or
knowledge whatsoever of any of
the other pieces of the system.
So theoretically the implementation could
take each one of those little processes
and put them on an entirely
separate thread.
And the application would still
work exactly the same way.
This model for concurrency, the CSP
model for concurrency, is so powerful.
It is the model for concurrency
in the Go programming language.
It's also what Clojure and
ClojureScript uses.
So I'm not, it's not just me making
something up and saying it's cool.
So really,
really, really, super smart people have
said this is the way to do concurrency.
And in Go they do have threads so
every Go, it's called a Go routine,
every Go routine does end up spinning up
on its own entirely independent thread.
It's one of the magic reasons why
Go has so much efficiency, so
much performance to it.
Because I'm able to spin up all these
different pieces of my application in
separate threads.
But I have a really simple way of
communicating between the two of them
through blocking channels, okay.
So let me try to illustrate
in code what that looks like.
I make a channel like I
do up here on line 1.
And then I have this process1,
which is a generator cuz we're
expressing this in terms of JavaScript.
He wants to send something
down the channel, so
he uses a method called put, and he says
this is the channel I want to send it on.
So we pass channel is the first, and
then we pass the next argument is
a message that we want to send.
You notice I'm using yield in
front of put, because I want for
the process1 generator to pause.
Until somebody on the other end
of that channel says I'm ready to
take that message.
So I say yield put,
which locally blocks the process1 until
somebody else comes along and unblocks it.
Then I have this other
process in my application,
maybe in an entirely
different part of the app.
He's running along and he says I
need a message from the ch channel.
So he says I'm gonna yield on a take,
like I'm doing on line 10.
It does not matter who gets there first.
>> Kyle: That's what's cool about it.
I don't have to worry about whether or not
there's a message waiting for me or not.
I just say I wanna take a message,
and I'll wait until one's ready.
Maybe it's ready right now, great.
If it's not, I'll just patiently wait.
I wanna push a message down.
I don't have to know whether or
not somebody's ready to get it or not.
I'm just gonna wait until somebody's
ready to take my message.
That's what lets them be so independent.
Because the semantics of this
communication channel take care of that
communication, that back pressure, for us.
So whenever process2 gets to line 10 and
it says I'm ready to take it,
immediately that message
transfers through the channel.
And process2 is unblocked,
and process1 is unblocked, and
then they just go on about their day.
And then we get to line 5 and
we say wait a minute,
I need a message from the channel.
So I'm gonna wait again.
And then process2,
he's running along and hey says hey,
I've got a message to send on the channel.
So I'm gonna wait until
somebody's ready to get it.
And he sends a message
back up the channel.
And then process1 is unblocked,
and then process2 is unblocked,
and they go on about their day.
So you can have hundreds of lines
of totally independent code that
doesn't have to worry about
any other piece of the system.
And the only part that has to
worry about it is when you know
I've got a channel that
I need some data on, or
I've got a channel that I
need to push some data along.
I'm just gonna wait for
somebody to tell me that's okay.
And underneath the covers this
abstraction, the CSP paradigm is what
manages all that complexity for you.
>> Kyle: Okay,
now the really,
really smart folks in Go, and Clojure,
and ClojureScript,
they're pretty convinced this is the most
powerful model invented to date for
concurrency management.
And I'm not one to bet against them,
I think they're right.
I do think this is the most powerful
pattern that I've ever seen or
heard anybody talk about for
concurrency management.
I'm fascinated by it, by the way.
I've spent the last year researching
how to understand this deeper and
seeing practical ways of applying
it to my user interfaces.
And I've spent a year at it and
I still feel like I'm barely scratching
the surface compared
to these smart people.
That whole standing on the shoulders
of giants, I'm like clinging on for
dear life.
I don't even hardly know
the stuff that they know.
But I'm convinced that there is
a whole lot here that we haven't even
really uncovered and
scratched the surface with.
So ClojureScript, guys that maintain
ClojureScript, specifically a guy named
David Swanadet, I'm sorry David Nolan
who goes by Swanadet on Twitter.
Super brilliant guy, every time I hear
him talk I'm just like how did I even,
he just drops down this knowledge like
it's so easy and I'm learning so much.
But he's got a UI framework called Om,
O-M.
And its ClojureScript,
which ClojureScript is ported to Java,
it's ClojureScript is Clojure that
can run in JavaScript in the browser.
And they use this CSP all over the place,
it models the entire
user interface in CSP.
And he produces this, the most amazing and
most performant user
interface I've ever seen.
It's incredible.
So I'm convinced that
there's a whole lot of,
we haven't scratched the surface
of the capabilities of it.
And that's why I'm trying to convince
people to think about this as well.
This is another one of those tools to
start to model our applications around.